README.md, before:

---
ospool:
    path: software_examples/python/tutorial-wordfreq/README.md
---

# A Wordcount Tutorial for Submitting Multiple Jobs

## Introduction

This tutorial shows you how to submit multiple jobs from a single submit file. This enables you to submit your workload without having to create one submit file per task. Use this guide as an introduction to learning how to submit a list of tasks as multiple jobs.

## Our list of tasks

Imagine you want to analyze how word usage varies from book to book or author to author over a collection of books. This is a common workflow shape, where you have a list of tasks that require different input files or parameters, but the same overall analysis.

Get the materials:

1. Log in to your OSPool Access Point.
1. Download the materials for this tutorial using the following command:
	```
	git clone https://github.com/osg-htc/tutorial-wordfreq
	```
1. Change into the `tutorial-wordfreq` directory:
	```
	cd tutorial-wordfreq
	```

## Submit a single task: analyze one book

### Test the command

Let's test our analysis to understand the expected behavior. We can analyze the book `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` by running the `wordcount.py` script: 

```
./wordcount.py Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
```

Run the `ls` command. You should see a new file, `counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv`, which has the results of this python script. This is the output we want, and the output we expect HTCondor to return to us when our job finishes. For now, remove the output: 

```
rm counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv
```

### Create a submit file

Let's translate this analysis into a form that HTCondor understands, so it can run the analysis for us. We describe this analysis in the form of a submit file.

Two key components of our analysis are:

1. The executable (`wordcount.py`)
2. The input file(s) (`Alice_in_Wonderland.txt`)

In HTCondor's submit file syntax, we describe the command we ran with the `executable` and `arguments` options:

```
executable = wordcount.py
arguments = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt	
```

The `executable` is the script that we want to run, and the `arguments` is 
everything else that follows the script when we run it, like the test above.

The input file for this job is the `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` 
text file. While we provided the name as in the `arguments`, we *also* need
to explicitly tell HTCondor to transfer the corresponding file from the Access Point (the machine you're currently on) to the Execution Point (the machine where your job runs).
We include the file name in the following submit file option: 

```
transfer_input_files = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
```

There are other submit file options that control other aspects of the job, like 
where to save error and logging information, and how many resources to request per 
job. This tutorial has a sample submit file (`wordcount.sub`) with these submit file options filled in for you: 

```
executable = wordcount.py
arguments = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt

log = log/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).log
error = err/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).err
output = out/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).out

transfer_input_files = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt

request_cpus   = 1
request_memory = 1GB
request_disk   = 1GB

queue 1
``` 

Confirm the contents of the submit file by printing it out:

```
cat wordcount.sub
```

We are now ready to submit our one-book analysis to the OSPool using HTCondor.

### Submit and monitor the job

After confirming the submit file, submit the job: 

```
condor_submit wordcount.sub
```

HTCondor will then print out a unique job ID corresponding to this submission.

Check the job's progress using `condor_q`, which will print out a table of your job'(s) status.

```
condor_q
```

You can also use the command `condor_watch_q` to monitor the
queue in real time (use the keyboard shortcut `Ctrl` + `C` to exit).

Once the job finishes, you should see the same `counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv` output when you enter `ls`.

## Submit a list of tasks: analyze multiple books

Now suppose you want to analyze multiple books - more than one at a time. 
You could create a separate submit file for each book, and submit all of the
files manually, but you'd have a lot of file lines to modify each time
(specifically, the `arguments` and `transfer_input_files` lines from the 
previous submit file). 

This would be tedious! HTCondor has options that make it easy to 
submit many jobs from one submit file. 

### Make a list

HTCondor can loop through a list and submit one job per line of that list - this is perfect for running the *same* analysis for *different* books!

First, let's make a list of items that are different for each task we want to run. In this example, the main difference is the books we want to analyze. So, our list should contain the names of these books.

We can easily create this list by using an `ls` command and sending the output to a text file that we'll call `book.list`: 

```
ls *.txt > book.list
```

The `book.list` file now contains each of the `.txt` file names in the current directory.

```
cat book.list
```

returns

```
Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
Dracula.txt
Huckleberry_Finn.txt
Pride_and_Prejudice.txt
```

### Modify the submit file

Next, we will make changes to our submit file so that it submits a job for 
each book title in our list (seen in the `book.list` file). 

Create a copy of our existing submit file, which we will use for this job submission. 

```
cp wordcount.sub many-wordcount.sub
```

We need to tell HTCondor which list to loop over, and what variable we want to assign that value. Open the `many-wordcount.sub` file with a text editor (i.e., `vi`, `nano`) and go to the end.

```
queue book from book.list 
```

This statement works like a `for` loop:

1. HTcondor looks for the text file, `book.list`
1. HTCondor looks at the first line of `book.list` and assigns that value to the variable `book`.
1. In the submit file, every occurrence of `$(book)` is replaced by the value assigned to `book`.
1. HTCondor submits one job.
1. HTCondor then reads the second line of `book.list`, and repeats steps 2-4 until it reaches the end of the list.

> The syntax `$(variablename)` represents a submit variable whose value
> will be substituted at the time of submission.

Now, let's edit the rest of the submit file. Replace the name of the book `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` in our submit file with the variable `$(book)`.

So, the following lines in the submit file should be changed to use the variable `$(book)`: 

```
arguments = $(book)

transfer_input_files = $(book)
```

### Submit and monitor the jobs

Let's submit all of our jobs.:

```
condor_submit many-wordcount.sub
```

This will now submit four jobs (one for each book on our list). Once all four 
have finished running, we should see four "counts" files, one for each book in the directory. 

If you don't see all four "counts" files, consider investigating the log, error, and output files and see if you can identify what caused that to happen.

Commit message:

Add Jupyter Notebook tutorial and update README with usage instructions

README.md, after:

---
ospool:
    path: software_examples/python/tutorial-wordfreq/README.md
---

# A Wordcount Tutorial for Submitting Multiple Jobs

## Introduction

This tutorial shows you how to submit multiple jobs from a single submit file. This enables you to submit your workload without having to create one submit file per task. Use this guide as an introduction to learning how to submit a list of tasks as multiple jobs.

## Our list of tasks

Imagine you want to analyze how word usage varies from book to book or author to author over a collection of books. This is a common workflow shape, where you have a list of tasks that require different input files or parameters, but the same overall analysis.

Get the materials:

1. Log in to your OSPool Access Point.
1. Download the materials for this tutorial using the following command:
	```
	git clone https://github.com/osg-htc/tutorial-wordfreq
	```
1. Change into the `tutorial-wordfreq` directory:
	```
	cd tutorial-wordfreq
	```

> If you would prefer to follow along in a Jupyter Notebook, you can also find this tutorial in `Wordcount_Tutorial.ipynb`. This repository and the notebook are available through the OSPool Guest Account on the [Notebooks server](https://notebook.ospool.osg-htc.org/hub/).
> 
> To use the guest notebook, simply login with your institutional credentials, select the "Guest Account: Explore OSPool Notebooks" option, and then open the `Wordcount_Tutorial.ipynb` notebook from the 'tutorial-wordfreq' directory.

## Submit a single task: analyze one book

### Test the command

Let's test our analysis to understand the expected behavior. We can analyze the book `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` by running the `wordcount.py` script: 

```
./wordcount.py Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
```

Run the `ls` command. You should see a new file, `counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv`, which has the results of this python script. This is the output we want, and the output we expect HTCondor to return to us when our job finishes. For now, remove the output: 

```
rm counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv
```

### Create a submit file

Let's translate this analysis into a form that HTCondor understands, so it can run the analysis for us. We describe this analysis in the form of a submit file.

Two key components of our analysis are:

1. The executable (`wordcount.py`)
2. The input file(s) (`Alice_in_Wonderland.txt`)

In HTCondor's submit file syntax, we describe the command we ran with the `executable` and `arguments` options:

```
executable = wordcount.py
arguments = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt	
```

The `executable` is the script that we want to run, and the `arguments` is 
everything else that follows the script when we run it, like the test above.

The input file for this job is the `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` 
text file. While we provided the name as in the `arguments`, we *also* need
to explicitly tell HTCondor to transfer the corresponding file from the Access Point (the machine you're currently on) to the Execution Point (the machine where your job runs).
We include the file name in the following submit file option: 

```
transfer_input_files = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
```

There are other submit file options that control other aspects of the job, like 
where to save error and logging information, and how many resources to request per 
job. This tutorial has a sample submit file (`wordcount.sub`) with these submit file options filled in for you: 

```
executable = wordcount.py
arguments = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt

log = log/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).log
error = err/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).err
output = out/job.$(Cluster).$(Process).out

transfer_input_files = Alice_in_Wonderland.txt

request_cpus   = 1
request_memory = 1GB
request_disk   = 1GB

queue 1
``` 

Confirm the contents of the submit file by printing it out:

```
cat wordcount.sub
```

We are now ready to submit our one-book analysis to the OSPool using HTCondor.

### Submit and monitor the job

After confirming the submit file, submit the job: 

```
condor_submit wordcount.sub
```

HTCondor will then print out a unique job ID corresponding to this submission.

Check the job's progress using `condor_q`, which will print out a table of your job'(s) status.

```
condor_q
```

You can also use the command `condor_watch_q` to monitor the
queue in real time (use the keyboard shortcut `Ctrl` + `C` to exit).

Once the job finishes, you should see the same `counts.Alice_in_Wonderland.tsv` output when you enter `ls`.

## Submit a list of tasks: analyze multiple books

Now suppose you want to analyze multiple books - more than one at a time. 
You could create a separate submit file for each book, and submit all of the
files manually, but you'd have a lot of file lines to modify each time
(specifically, the `arguments` and `transfer_input_files` lines from the 
previous submit file). 

This would be tedious! HTCondor has options that make it easy to 
submit many jobs from one submit file. 

### Make a list

HTCondor can loop through a list and submit one job per line of that list - this is perfect for running the *same* analysis for *different* books!

First, let's make a list of items that are different for each task we want to run. In this example, the main difference is the books we want to analyze. So, our list should contain the names of these books.

We can easily create this list by using an `ls` command and sending the output to a text file that we'll call `book.list`: 

```
ls *.txt > book.list
```

The `book.list` file now contains each of the `.txt` file names in the current directory.

```
cat book.list
```

returns

```
Alice_in_Wonderland.txt
Dracula.txt
Huckleberry_Finn.txt
Pride_and_Prejudice.txt
```

### Modify the submit file

Next, we will make changes to our submit file so that it submits a job for 
each book title in our list (seen in the `book.list` file). 

Create a copy of our existing submit file, which we will use for this job submission. 

```
cp wordcount.sub many-wordcount.sub
```

We need to tell HTCondor which list to loop over, and what variable we want to assign that value. Open the `many-wordcount.sub` file with a text editor (i.e., `vi`, `nano`) and go to the end.

```
queue book from book.list 
```

This statement works like a `for` loop:

1. HTcondor looks for the text file, `book.list`
1. HTCondor looks at the first line of `book.list` and assigns that value to the variable `book`.
1. In the submit file, every occurrence of `$(book)` is replaced by the value assigned to `book`.
1. HTCondor submits one job.
1. HTCondor then reads the second line of `book.list`, and repeats steps 2-4 until it reaches the end of the list.

> The syntax `$(variablename)` represents a submit variable whose value
> will be substituted at the time of submission.

Now, let's edit the rest of the submit file. Replace the name of the book `Alice_in_Wonderland.txt` in our submit file with the variable `$(book)`.

So, the following lines in the submit file should be changed to use the variable `$(book)`: 

```
arguments = $(book)

transfer_input_files = $(book)
```

### Submit and monitor the jobs

Let's submit all of our jobs.:

```
condor_submit many-wordcount.sub
```

This will now submit four jobs (one for each book on our list). Once all four 
have finished running, we should see four "counts" files, one for each book in the directory. 

If you don't see all four "counts" files, consider investigating the log, error, and output files and see if you can identify what caused that to happen.
